# Electric_motor_fault_detection
Eccentricity, one of the major faults in motors, is a condition in which the air gap distribution around the rotor is not uniform. In particular static eccentricity is typically caused due to manufacturing tolerances and structural deformity in the stator. In the case of static eccentricity, the point of minimum air gap remains fixed in space. Eccentricity fault leads to unbalanced magnetic pull, which in turn affects the life and performance of the motor. Therefore, it is important to detect such a fault.
<br/><br/>
Several approaches have been reported in literature to detect static eccentricity fault. However, they are expensive and invasive in nature. To overcome these drawbacks, researchers have focused on model-based eccentricity fault detection schemes. In model-based approaches, induction motor is modelled under normal and faulty conditions. The models are used to predict signals such as current signatures, which are then compared to ascertain the existence of faults. Model-based schemes are non-invasive in nature. However, they are not robust. They are negatively impacted by non-ideal conditions such as supply harmonics, manufacturing tolerances, load variations etc.. Most of the reported work have extracted features from motor line currents and voltages by transforming them to frequency domain. In the reported work, motor line voltage data is used to train a machine learning model that will detect static eccentricity fault in three phase squirrel cage induction motors. Features have been extracted solely from time-domain analysis of motor’s line voltages.
<br/><br/>
In this research, the developed algorithm is confined to the time-domain as it is computationally less rigorous. Moreover, motor line voltage data alone was chosen to carry out fault detection because the voltage signal had a consistent magnitude regardless of load condition or fault severity. This enhanced robustness of features extracted and thus, a more reliable prediction could be made.
<br/><br/> 
The selected time domain voltage features group data according to either a healthy or a faulty condition. The k-NN algorithm is best suited to classify data based off similar data points or feature vectors. This means that given a certain amount of training vectors, k-NN algorithm identifies the ‘k’ number of nearest neighbours to a new vector and then groups it with that corresponding class. Evidently, the time-domain features selected should distinguish classes in distinct groupings of vectors or data points. The k-NN method can be tailored to further improve results by selecting an appropriate ‘k’ number of neighbours, distance metric and distance weighting. The method has been used for fault detection in induction motors.
<br/><br/>
To implement the proposed approach, a total of 12 datasets from a 3-phase, 208 V, 3 hp squirrel cage induction motor were collected at a sampling rate of 3600 Hz. Each dataset contained 15 seconds long data. Among the twelve datasets, two were used for training data while ten were used for testing. These data sets come from the same motor operating under various operating conditions. Two training data sets; one corresponding to a healthy motor and the other a 20% SE motor were used to train the algorithm used in this study. During data processing and feature extraction, each feature set is constructed from the two voltage features, kurtosis and root of sum of squares, along with a third feature known as a response variable. The response variable labels given data to the algorithm for training purposes. During the training phase this ‘response variable’ notifies the algorithm which data corresponds to which class. In this study, a numeric value is assigned to each set of features to classify it as either healthy or faulty. This allows the algorithm to construct two classes of data: one for healthy motors and one for motors suffering from static eccentric conditions. MATLAB’s Classification Learner application identifies this algorithm to be 100% accurate upon creation.
